---
layout: page
title: Chalk Valley Farm & Kitchen
---

Initially a farm-to-table burger bar with one draught beer and a fast-casual dining experience, popular particularly with the student market. With my leadership, the venue doubled in size, the range increased to eleven local craft beers on draught, unique contemporary cocktails and a much broader menu of barbecue food, dramatically increasing sales volume and causing an upturn in reviews.

<blockquote class="instagram-media" data-instgrm-captioned data-instgrm-version="7" style=" background:#FFF; border:0; border-radius:3px; box-shadow:0 0 1px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.5),0 1px 10px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.15); margin: 1px; max-width:658px; padding:0; width:99.375%; width:-webkit-calc(100% - 2px); width:calc(100% - 2px);"><div style="padding:8px;"> <div style=" background:#F8F8F8; line-height:0; margin-top:40px; padding:49.95219885277247% 0; text-align:center; width:100%;"> <div style=" background:url(data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAACwAAAAsCAMAAAApWqozAAAABGdBTUEAALGPC/xhBQAAAAFzUkdCAK7OHOkAAAAMUExURczMzPf399fX1+bm5mzY9AMAAADiSURBVDjLvZXbEsMgCES5/P8/t9FuRVCRmU73JWlzosgSIIZURCjo/ad+EQJJB4Hv8BFt+IDpQoCx1wjOSBFhh2XssxEIYn3ulI/6MNReE07UIWJEv8UEOWDS88LY97kqyTliJKKtuYBbruAyVh5wOHiXmpi5we58Ek028czwyuQdLKPG1Bkb4NnM+VeAnfHqn1k4+GPT6uGQcvu2h2OVuIf/gWUFyy8OWEpdyZSa3aVCqpVoVvzZZ2VTnn2wU8qzVjDDetO90GSy9mVLqtgYSy231MxrY6I2gGqjrTY0L8fxCxfCBbhWrsYYAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC); display:block; height:44px; margin:0 auto -44px; position:relative; top:-22px; width:44px;"></div></div> <p style=" margin:8px 0 0 0; padding:0 4px;"> <a href="https://www.instagram.com/p/BJ-hEjEggJU/" style=" color:#000; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; line-height:17px; text-decoration:none; word-wrap:break-word;" target="_blank">Burgers for everyone at @chalkvalley 🍔🍔🍔🍔🍔</a></p> <p style=" color:#c9c8cd; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px; margin-bottom:0; margin-top:8px; overflow:hidden; padding:8px 0 7px; text-align:center; text-overflow:ellipsis; white-space:nowrap;">A photo posted by Southampton Bloggers (@sotonbloggers) on <time style=" font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px;" datetime="2016-09-05T14:00:41+00:00">Sep 5, 2016 at 7:00am PDT</time></p></div></blockquote>
<script async defer src="//platform.instagram.com/en_US/embeds.js"></script>

My initial project, besides the day-to-day front of house management, was to take overall responsibility for the expansion of the venue. This started with a discussion of the layout of the newly acquired unit, selecting fixtures and fittings with the owner and analysing the building blueprint to optimise the design for diners' and drinkers' experience and also speed and ease of service.

## Craft and cocktail bar from scratch

We set our aims and a target date, I coordinated contractors and oversaw the renovation of the space, providing feedback throughout to the directors. During this period the then general manager needed a long period away from the business and the opening night was set to be during this break, leaving me with temporary overall responsibility for the restaurant and mere weeks to complete the expansion project which had fallen behind schedule due to unforseeable contractor issues. Putting in a series of over 90 hour weeks I was able to meet the target launch date successfully.

<blockquote class="instagram-media" data-instgrm-captioned data-instgrm-version="7" style=" background:#FFF; border:0; border-radius:3px; box-shadow:0 0 1px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.5),0 1px 10px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.15); margin: 1px; max-width:658px; padding:0; width:99.375%; width:-webkit-calc(100% - 2px); width:calc(100% - 2px);"><div style="padding:8px;"> <div style=" background:#F8F8F8; line-height:0; margin-top:40px; padding:50.0% 0; text-align:center; width:100%;"> <div style=" background:url(data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAACwAAAAsCAMAAAApWqozAAAABGdBTUEAALGPC/xhBQAAAAFzUkdCAK7OHOkAAAAMUExURczMzPf399fX1+bm5mzY9AMAAADiSURBVDjLvZXbEsMgCES5/P8/t9FuRVCRmU73JWlzosgSIIZURCjo/ad+EQJJB4Hv8BFt+IDpQoCx1wjOSBFhh2XssxEIYn3ulI/6MNReE07UIWJEv8UEOWDS88LY97kqyTliJKKtuYBbruAyVh5wOHiXmpi5we58Ek028czwyuQdLKPG1Bkb4NnM+VeAnfHqn1k4+GPT6uGQcvu2h2OVuIf/gWUFyy8OWEpdyZSa3aVCqpVoVvzZZ2VTnn2wU8qzVjDDetO90GSy9mVLqtgYSy231MxrY6I2gGqjrTY0L8fxCxfCBbhWrsYYAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC); display:block; height:44px; margin:0 auto -44px; position:relative; top:-22px; width:44px;"></div></div> <p style=" margin:8px 0 0 0; padding:0 4px;"> <a href="https://www.instagram.com/p/BM1nruwBJRO/" style=" color:#000; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; line-height:17px; text-decoration:none; word-wrap:break-word;" target="_blank">When is &#39;too early&#39;? 🍸 - - - #outonthetown #nightout #whenistooearly #southampton #southamptontown #husband #itsalreadygettingdark #bar #cocktailbar #spirits #cocktailoclock #startwithasmoothie #fruitmakesitok</a></p> <p style=" color:#c9c8cd; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px; margin-bottom:0; margin-top:8px; overflow:hidden; padding:8px 0 7px; text-align:center; text-overflow:ellipsis; white-space:nowrap;">A photo posted by Helen Callender (@hellabellabaloo) on <time style=" font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px;" datetime="2016-11-15T16:39:29+00:00">Nov 15, 2016 at 8:39am PST</time></p></div></blockquote>
<script async defer src="//platform.instagram.com/en_US/embeds.js"></script>

For the new bar launch we introduced a cocktail menu which I researched, wrote and developed, having attended seminars and workshops with high-profile bar managers and spirits experts such as Alex Kratena, also enlisting the assistance of a bar manager from a Michelin starred restaurant. I used my existing relationships with local craft brewers to create a wide ranging and challenging initial beer list and put in place a system to rotate and change the menu over time to suit the seasonality of beer drinking. Both the beer and cocktail menues necessitated producing training documents and organising tasting sessions for my largely student team to learn all about the new range and the history, design and production of mixed drinks.

I performed extensive market research on local venues, their food and alcohol range and their pricing structures to set target pricing and therefore create budgets based on the target GP set by the company directors. During this phase I contacted our existing suppliers and renegotiated our current purchase agreements, slashing our costs and hence expanding margins across the board.

## Rethinking the restaurant routines

The general manager then departed the business and I adopted the role on a temporary basis once again. By this point our infrastructure in terms of the till systems and the back office was in dire need of being brought up to standard and the user interfaces on the POS terminals redesigned to meet the needs of the expanded product range. I set up a new internal network with upgraded bandwidth, security and other capabilities to serve the POS and security systems and upgraded the fixed terminals and iPads, also reconfigured the printer systems to better suit the needs of the kitchen and two bar setup.

The old practises and routines within the restaurant were often no longer suitable for the expanded venue and higher trade volume and therefore I took what I knew from the Kaizen (Toyota Way) and Six Sigma business methods to streamline many processes, reducing waste and simplifying the experience for both staff and guests. For example, I moved us from dynamic to static tabling, aiding communication between front and back of house and accelerating service. I also successfully trialed and subsequently implemented full table service in the new bar section which had the effect of raising spend per head by 35% across the business.

## Building the team and the business

We interviewed for and hired a trainee assistant manager who I mentored in the company procedures, products and particularly the ordering and management of cellar and stock. I also worked in partnership with the head chef taking my previous experience in American barbecue cuisine to develop and promote a new range of smoked meats which supplemented and soon surpassed in popularity the pre-existing burger range.

I established an incentive structure to reward both sales and service which had the great effect of an increase in upselling of 18% and a massive reduction in back of house wastage. This led to us beating our previous weekly sales gross record every week during the month of September.

<blockquote class="instagram-media" data-instgrm-captioned data-instgrm-version="7" style=" background:#FFF; border:0; border-radius:3px; box-shadow:0 0 1px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.5),0 1px 10px 0 rgba(0,0,0,0.15); margin: 1px; max-width:658px; padding:0; width:99.375%; width:-webkit-calc(100% - 2px); width:calc(100% - 2px);"><div style="padding:8px;"> <div style=" background:#F8F8F8; line-height:0; margin-top:40px; padding:37.4537037037037% 0; text-align:center; width:100%;"> <div style=" background:url(data:image/png;base64,iVBORw0KGgoAAAANSUhEUgAAACwAAAAsCAMAAAApWqozAAAABGdBTUEAALGPC/xhBQAAAAFzUkdCAK7OHOkAAAAMUExURczMzPf399fX1+bm5mzY9AMAAADiSURBVDjLvZXbEsMgCES5/P8/t9FuRVCRmU73JWlzosgSIIZURCjo/ad+EQJJB4Hv8BFt+IDpQoCx1wjOSBFhh2XssxEIYn3ulI/6MNReE07UIWJEv8UEOWDS88LY97kqyTliJKKtuYBbruAyVh5wOHiXmpi5we58Ek028czwyuQdLKPG1Bkb4NnM+VeAnfHqn1k4+GPT6uGQcvu2h2OVuIf/gWUFyy8OWEpdyZSa3aVCqpVoVvzZZ2VTnn2wU8qzVjDDetO90GSy9mVLqtgYSy231MxrY6I2gGqjrTY0L8fxCxfCBbhWrsYYAAAAAElFTkSuQmCC); display:block; height:44px; margin:0 auto -44px; position:relative; top:-22px; width:44px;"></div></div> <p style=" margin:8px 0 0 0; padding:0 4px;"> <a href="https://www.instagram.com/p/BK8JVTwDAnR/" style=" color:#000; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; font-style:normal; font-weight:normal; line-height:17px; text-decoration:none; word-wrap:break-word;" target="_blank">A morning of #Cocktail creation &amp; tasting with the team at #ChalkValley. Is it ever too early? Pop down to give &#39;am a try!</a></p> <p style=" color:#c9c8cd; font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px; margin-bottom:0; margin-top:8px; overflow:hidden; padding:8px 0 7px; text-align:center; text-overflow:ellipsis; white-space:nowrap;">A photo posted by Chalk Valley Farm &amp; Kitchen (@chalkvalley) on <time style=" font-family:Arial,sans-serif; font-size:14px; line-height:17px;" datetime="2016-09-29T12:26:10+00:00">Sep 29, 2016 at 5:26am PDT</time></p></div></blockquote>
<script async defer src="//platform.instagram.com/en_US/embeds.js"></script>

My time at Chalk Valley was a period of extraordinary hard work, culminating in a series of remarkable successes both personally and for the business.

**_Assistant Manager, later Acting General Manager, May to December, 2016_**
